Using Pho to tag photos with keywords

This is a description of how I use Pho to tag my photos. This is by no
means the only way to do this, and I welcome hearing about better solutions.

I run pho -k *.jpg in a directory. Keywords mode shows each photo
at a smaller-than-usual size, and brings up a Keywords dialog at the
same time. The Keywords dialog has a Caption field at the top,
and a list (initially only one) of numbered keyword fields below it.
Initially, focus is in the first keyword text field of the dialog.

I look at the first photo and say "Oh, that's a bluebird", and type
"bluebird" in the text field. So keyword #0 will be "bluebird".
At this point, the keyword doesn't apply to this photo, because
the 0 button isn't pressed. Pho should probably notice that I'm typing
something and automatically toggle the button, but for now, I do it
either with the mouse or by pressing <Ctrl>0. In the Keywords dialog,
<Ctrl> and any digit will toggle the corresponding button;
<Ctrl><Alt> and any digit will toggle ten plus the corresponding number.

Okay, now my first photo is tagged with Bluebird. I move on to the next
image. Since hitting spacebar while I'm in that text field will just
add a space to the keyword ("bluebird "), I use <Ctrl>Space.
(Of course, I could also move the mouse into the image window and hit
the spacebar there, but that's more hassle. The goal is to drive the
whole process from the keyboard without needing to switch to the mouse.)

The second image has a bluebird too, but now it's sitting on a maple
tree with the leaves in beautiful fall colors.  The Keywords dialog
still shows "bluebird" as the 0th tag, but the 0 button isn't
pressed. I hit <Ctrl>Space to tag it as a bluebird photo. But I want
some more tags for this image, too. So I hit Return, which opens up
a tag #1 (focus is in the text field already) and type "maple tree".
The 1 button is already selected -- pho assumes that if I'm adding a
tag, it's because it applies to this image. I hit Return again and
add a "fall colors" tag. This image now has three tags, 0, 1 and 2.

<Ctrl>Space moves to the next image. That's the tree but the bluebird
has flown away. I hold <Ctrl> down and type 1 2 to add the "maple tree"
and "fall colors" tags.

At any time, if an image has a unique, particularly interesting story
involved with it I can add something to the Caption field. Captions
aren't shared among images; they're unique to each image. I don't use
captions myself; they were added for another pho user who uses a
different tagging scheme from mine.

I continue tagging images, and if I get to the last image in the
directory and haven't had more than 10 tags, I'm happy. When there
are more than 10 tags, 0-9, it gets a little more complicated: I
have to remember to use <Ctrl><Alt>. That still works fine but
sometimes switching <Alt> on and off (for an image where I want
tag 5 and also tag 12) can sometimes get confusing. Sometimes I
even go to the mouse for tags above 9, though I try not to.
If the tag list gets quite long (especially if it goes over 20,
though that's rare), I may make a note of the last tagged image,
quit and restart pho from where I left off with a fresh tags list.

KEYWORDS FILES

Okay, I've been through the whole directory and tagged everything,
and pho gets to the last image and quits. What now?

Pho prints all the tags on standard output, something like this:

bluebird: img_6938.jpg img_6939.jpg

maple tree: img_6939.jpg img_6940.jpg

fall colors: img_6939.jpg img_6940.jpg img_6953.jpg

(It also prints other things, like captions, rotation information and
such, but that's not relevant to this document.)

I save that list in a file called Keywords. I use the mouse to select
all the keywords info pho has just printed out, cat > Keywords and
paste the pho output into the file, then close it with <Ctrl>d.

Yes, pho should save it to keywords directly, and should read in
initial information from a Keywords file if it exists. It wouldn't
even be that hard to add; I just haven't gotten around to it.

If there's already a Keywords file (perhaps it's a really big photo
collection and I stopped halfway through because I had too many
keywords piling up), I use cat >> Keywords to append to the file.

SEARCHING KEYWORDS FILES

Okay, great, now I have a big hierarchy of directories that each have
a file named Keywords along with a lot of JPG files. What now?

I have a little script called fotogr,
https://github.com/akkana/scripts/blob/master/fotogr
that recursively searches directories and looks for keywords (or key
phrases) inside any file named Keywords.

So if I want to know what photos I took of lakes in 2012, I cd to
~/Images/2012 and type fotogr lake.

fotogr isn't very smart, though: it can't do any boolean logic, like
looking for photos that include a lake AND fall color. That's
something I've been wanting to add, but haven't come up with a
sensible syntax for it. yet.




